13.
1.
7 Java
The Java programming language was developed by Sun Microsystems in the early 1990s.
 Although it is primarily used for Internet-based applications, Java is a simple, efficient, general-purpose language.
 Java was originally designed for embedded network applications running on multiple platforms.
 It is a portable, object-oriented, interpreted language.


Java is extremely portable.
 The same Java application will run identically on any computer, regardless of hardware features or operating system, as long as it has a Java interpreter.
 Besides portability, another of Java's key advantages is its set of security features which protect a PC running a Java program not only from problems caused by erroneous code but also from malicious programs (such as viruses).
 You can safely run a Java applet downloaded from the Internet, because Java's security features prevent these types of applets from accessing a PC's hard drive or network connections.
 An applet is typically a small Java program that is embedded within an HTML page.


Java can be considered both a compiled and an interpreted language because its source code is first compiled into a binary byte-code.
 This byte-code runs on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), which is usually a software-based interpreter.
 The use of compiled byte-code allows the interpreter (the virtual machine) to be small and efficient (and nearly as fast as the CPU running native, compiled code).
 In addition, this byte-code gives Java its portability: it will run on any JVM that is correctly implemented, regardless of computer hardware or software configuration.
 Most Web browsers (such as Microsoft Internet Explorer or Netscape Communicator) contain a JVM to run Java applets.


Compared to C++ (another object-oriented language), Java code runs a little slower (because of the JVM) but it is more portable and has much better security features.
 The virtual machine provides isolation between an untrusted Java program and the PC running the software.
 Java's syntax is similar to C++ but the languages are quite different.
 For example, Java does not permit programmers to implement operator overloading while C++ does.
 In addition, Java is a dynamic language where you can safely modify a program while it is running, whereas C++ does not allow it.
 This is especially important for network applications that cannot afford any downtime.
 Also, all basic Java data types are predefined and not platform-dependent, whereas some data types can change with the platform used in C or C++ (such as the int type).


Java programs are more highly structured than C++ equivalents.
 All functions (or Java methods) and executable statements in Java must reside within a class while C++ allows function definitions and lines of code to exist outside of classes (as in C-style programs).
 Global data and methods cannot reside outside of a class in Java, whereas C++ allows this.
 These restrictions, though cumbersome at times, help maintain the integrity and security of Java programs and forces them to be totally object-oriented.


Another key feature of Java is that it is an open standard with publicly available source code.
 Sun Microsystems controls the Java language and its related products but Sun's liberal license policy contributed to the Internet community embracing Java as a standard.
 You can freely download all the tools you need to develop and run Java applets and applications from Sun's Java Web site (http://java.
sun.
com).


Here is a simple Java program that averages numbers entered from the keyboard:


Sign in to download full-size image
In this example, the class AverageProgram (which is the program) contains only one method (function), main().
 Notice that much of the syntax is the same as C or C++, including comment delimiters: you can use either C (/* */) or C++ (//) style delimiters in Java.
 Even the while() statement works as it would in C/C++.
 Output to the screen is accomplished using System.
out.
println(), where println() is an invoked method of the standard Java System.
out object.
 Java also has a System.
in object, for reading from the keyboard, but it must be processed to be useful.
 In this example, ConsoleIn is assumed to be a previously defined class (that uses System.
in), which contains the method Readlnt() for reading an integer value.


As with the other programming languages we have surveyed, this was just a brief view of Java.
 For more details, refer to one of the Java texts in the bibliography or visit Sun Microsystems’ Java Web site (http://java.
sun.
com).
 Next we will discuss writing programs that run under a Microsoft Windows operating system.
